When, in AD 1170, men sent by King Henry II of England murdered the
primate of England – Archbishop Thomas Becket – in his own cathedral,
the upshot was a sharp reverse for the royal cause. No sooner was the
prelate dead than his grave became an object of pilgrimage and miracles
began to take place on it; within two years, indeed, he was formally
proclaimed a saint. Not only was the king forced to repent in public, but
the extent of his surrender is indicated by the fact that England was
subjected to a flood of papal decrees dealing with every aspect of government including, in particular, the clergy’s right to be judged solely by
men of their own kind. Henry’s son and second in the line of succession
went further still. King John (1199–1216) spent much of his reign fighting Philip Augustus of France over Anjou and Maine. Requiring all the
support he could get, he appropriated the revenue of the church only to
find himself helpless when Pope Innocent III, acting in retaliation,
quashed the election of his nominee to the most important ecclesiastical
position in the country. The dispute, which climaxed in 1213, was finally
resolved when John agreed to install the pope’s man rather than his own.
The king even went so far as to make England a papal fief, receiving it
back on condition of paying 1,000 silver marks a year.
Ninety years after this surrender a somewhat similar incident took
place in France, only to end very differently. The papacy’s protracted,
though ultimately victorious, struggle against the Empire had increased
its dependence on the House of Capet; at the turn of the fourteenth
century King Philip IV the Fair was the mightiest lord in Christendom.
He and Boniface VIII quarreled, as rulers often do, over money. At issue
were, first, the right of the French clergy to transfer funds out of the
kingdom, and secondly the king’s own right to tax them. Scarcely had the
pope given way over this question – which, hoping for support in other
matters, he did in 1297–8 – than another dispute, this time over the king’s
right to dismiss offending bishops and put them on trial, broke out. In the
person of John of Paris (d. 1306), Philip found an ecclesiastic who was
every bit as tenacious in defending the perfection of secular rule as the
pope was in denying it. As matters came to a head the king and his
advisers held a secret meeting at the Louvre. There they fabricated all kinds of charges against Boniface, ranging from unlawful occupation of
the Holy See to heresy. One of them, Guillaume de Nogaret, was sent to
Rome to see whether he could stir up an anti-papal rebellion among the
noble families that held the town in their grip. In the summer of 1303 he
and a party of armed men broke into the pope’s residence, took him
prisoner, and actually slapped him.
Though Boniface died shortly after this incident, the dispute was by no
means at an end. His immediate successor, Benedict XI, reigned only for
a few months; but when Clement V assumed the tiara, Philip, now
unquestionably in control, forced him to annul Unam Sanctam insofar as
it applied to France. In the summer of 1307 Clement, expecting to
preside over an ecclesiastical council that was to be held in Tours,
traveled to France. There he had to stand by as the king mounted a
spectacular series of show trials in which the Knights Templar were
accused of everything from heresy to homosexuality. What military force
the church possessed within the realm of France was destroyed; its
commanders were executed, its fortresses and revenues taken away and
joined to the royal domain. Not wishing to turn his back while these
proceedings were under way, Clement remained in France. In 1309 he
selected Avignon, which though a papal fief was surrounded by French
territory, as his residence, thus turning himself into the king’s prisoner.
During the next seventy years all popes were Frenchmen and, without
exception, appointees of the French crown. The papacy’s international
character suffered, given that any measure suggested or taken by a pope
was likely to receive automatic support from the French, Spanish, and
Scottish clergies and, equally automatically, to be rejected by the English,
Hungarian, Italian, and, above all, Imperial ones.
In 1356, these quarrels led to the loss of the pope’s right to participate
in the Imperial election process. The papacy’s return to Rome, which
took place in 1378, was soon followed by the Great Schism. It was
occasioned by the Roman population’s insistence that the successor of
Gregory XI (died 1378) should be not another Frenchman but an Italian
like themselves; lasting for thirty years, the Schism repeatedly led to the
spectacle of two and even three popes all quarreling furiously with each
other as to which of them was Christ’s true vicar and which, on the
contrary, the Antichrist. The condition of the papacy in these years can
scarcely be imagined. One pope – Urban VI – so feared conspiracy that he tortured and executed his own cardinals when, driven out of Rome, he
roamed the south Italian countryside. Another – John XXIII – was
accused of murder, rape, sodomy, and incest (the more serious accusations were suppressed) before, disguised as a crossbowman, he was forced
to flee from the Council of Constance; afterwards his very name was
erased from the official list of pontiffs. As popes excommunicated and
deposed one another they called on the lay rulers to intervene on their
behalf, waging war and laying siege to each other’s seats of power in Rome
and Avignon. By so doing they enabled those rulers to gain concessions of
every kind.
Long after the schism had been brought to an end by the election of
Martin V (1417), its residue continued to affect the relationship between
ecclesiastical and secular government. The spectacle of popes being
elected and then deposed had reopened the ancient question as to whose
authority, that of the pope or that of the Council of the church, was
supreme;	 worse, contemporaries had become used to the possibility that
an individual might both wear the tiara and be a heretic. In 1438 the
Conciliarists showed what they could do by deposing Eugenius IV and
electing Felix V in his stead. Ten years passed before the renewed split
could be healed; no wonder subsequent popes held ecclesiastical councils
in holy terror. For the next century – in fact, until the onset of the
Counter-Reformation – the division of the church played into the hands
of secular rulers. Whenever a conflict with the church appeared likely,
e.g., over taxation, French and Spanish rulers in particular could turn to
the pope for assistance; conversely, in dealing with the Roman curia they
would threaten to summon an assembly of the prelates of the realm or
else, in England, of Parliament. Calling on the clergymen’s patriotism
and contrasting it with the claims of ‘‘foreign’’ (or, in France, ‘‘ultramontane’’) Rome often presented a good way for obtaining their support,
especially over benefices. And the later the date, the more true this
became.
Throughout the first half of the fifteenth century the papacy continued
to suffer additional blows. As the Albiginsian, Waldensian, Cathar, and
Lollard movements in particular show, heresy – even large-scale, organized heresy supported by entire social groups – had by no means been
rare during the Middle Ages.
 However, the Hussite Revolt of 1419–36
was something else; it was the first to unite the greater part of a longestablished Christian nation against the established religion. Hus himself
made the mistake of trusting a safe conduct that had been granted to him and ended up by being burnt at the stake. His supporters suffered savage
repression at the hands of the Emperor and the German territorial rulers.
Still, his principles were not forgotten. Protected by part of the Czech
nobility, a Hussite (Utraquist) Church continued to operate in Bohemia. Its practices, particularly in regard to the language in which
services were held (Czech rather than Latin) and the wine of the Eucharist (which was taken by both priest and laymen) differed significantly
from those of Rome; yet they had to be tolerated by the latter for close to
two centuries to come. Much ecclesiastical property had also been confiscated by the same nobility and was not restored. Finally, the ease with
which the movement was able to spread from its source through Saxony
and Mecklenburg all the way to the Baltic coast acted as a forewarning of
the Reformation to come.
Meanwhile the foundations of the church’s secular authority were
being attacked by the new humanist scholarship emerging in Italy. Its key
concept was the admiration of everything classical, which itself implied
that an orderly – even flourishing and intellectually superior – civilization
was possible without the benefit of the Christian faith. One of the first
indications of what humanism and its supporters, once they put their
minds to the matter, could do to reduce the position of the church came
in 1440. The exact origin and meaning of the so-called Donation of
Constantine – one of the key documents used by the papacy to justify its
claim to monarchical power over Rome, Italy, and the West – had been
disputed at least since the tenth century; now Lorenzo Valla, exercising
his knowledge of classical Latin, ended the debate by exposing the Donation as an eighth-century forgery and not a very skillful one at that. Valla,
who like many of his fellow Italians regarded the established church as a
source of corruption, political division, and war, became famous overnight. He ended his declamation by expressing the hope that, since the
church’s claims had been exposed, its lands would be swiftly secularized
and its functions reduced to the spiritual sphere which alone belonged to
it.
By this time the most important monarchies had long since become
established facts. Kings either pushed resolutions through their parliaments – as with the English Statutes of Praemunire (1351) and the
French Pragmatic Sanction (1439) – or else they negotiated with the pope
of the day and signed a concordat. Whatever the procedure used, invariably it led to the church’s financial independence being lost and its property made subject to royal taxation. To mention only a few landmarks, already Edward II (1307–27) managed to squeeze more money
out of the church than he did from his lay vassals. In 1366 John of
Gaunt, acting in the name of Richard II, formally renounced England’s
status as a papal fief; when the same king, having attained his majority,
appealed to Rome in his dispute with the nobility, that very act was used
as additional grounds for deposing him. In France the appointment of
foreigners to vacant ecclesiastical positions was prohibited in 1439,
though the prohibition became definitive only in 1516. Louis XI (1461–
83) had the 600 most important ecclesiastical benefices listed and declared subject to his own control, thus further reinforcing his grip over
personnel and enabling him to exercise patronage; by bestowing them
upon lay supporters, he turned them into one more instrument of royal
government and a notoriously corrupt one at that. Finally, in Spain
King Ferdinand – who with his wife styled himself ‘‘the Catholic’’ –
appointed himself master of the various military orders as the offices
became vacant between 1477 and 1498. In 1531 Pope Adrian VI accepted the move as a fait accompli and confirmed it. It brought the crown
lands as well as revenue; however, it was only ten years after this that
Charles V followed the example of his French colleague and definitely
prohibited foreigners from taking up ecclesiastical benefices in the country.
The clergy’s other rights, such as appealing to the pope against the
royal justice system, were likewise being reduced. In France after the end
of the Hundred Years War, Louis XI prohibited the Inquisition from
persecuting heretics except at his own express command. He insisted that
every sentence passed by an ecclesiastical court was subject to review by
the parlement of Paris; to prevent priests from conspiring against him he
prohibited them from traveling abroad without obtaining permission
first. Francis I (1515–47) made them take the same oath to himself as was
sworn by the rest of his subjects, thus moving one step closer toward
ending their special status. Meanwhile, in England during the early years
of Henry VIII, a comprehensive census was held – the first in 200 years –
to determine just what properties were and were not owned by the church
(and also which churches possessed the right to offer asylum). Some
matters, such as the making and execution of wills, were removed from
the church’s jurisdiction. One – defamation – was struck off the books except insofar as it was directed against the king. Here as elsewhere the
ecclesiastical authorities were now entirely dependent on the cooperation
of the king’s officers for carrying out the sentences that they imposed over
whatever cases remained within their jurisdiction. This even applied to
conservative Portugal and Spain; and indeed it has been said that no
institution was so completely under royal control as the Spanish Inquisition. One way or another, the good old days when every senior
prelate and every first-class abbot possessed their own jails were coming
to an end.
An even more important turning point in the triumph of the monarchs
over the church came in the form of the Reformation. From the beginning
one reason why Luther in particular gained so much more support than
previous reformers was precisely because of his insistence that the movement he led had no revolutionary overtones; he believed that religion
should not be allowed to invade the realm of the secular power. This
position led him to write vicious tracts in opposition to the Peasants’
Revolt of 1525; in 1530 it was formalized when his collaborator, Melanchthon, drew up the Confession of Augsburg and quoted Christ’s words
to the effect that His Kingdom was not of his world. Other leading
reformers, notably Zwingli, Calvin, Bucer, and Beza, dedicated some or
all of their works to the secular rulers of the day in the hope of gaining
assistance in spreading their views.
Once the princes’ fears concerning its political effects had been assuaged, Protestantism spread rapidly. Its victory was perhaps most complete in Scotland, the Scandinavian countries, and, though it took longer
and ended in a different way, England; but it also took over large parts of
Germany, Bohemia, Poland, Hungary, Switzerland, France, and the Low
Countries. Whether in its Lutheran, Zwinglian, Calvinist, Anglican, or
Presbyterian (Scottish) form, wherever it reached, its adherents renounced their obedience to the pope. They also dissolved the monasteries as
the church’s spiritual centers and, embarking on the large-scale confiscation of ecclesiastical property, reduced its economic power in general.
The process whereby the church’s property was seized assumed various
forms. In Germany entire principalities were secularized; the most spectacular instance took place in 1525. Employing Luther as his consultant,
Albert of Brandenburg-Ansbach used his position as master of the Teutonic Order to appropriate it lock, stock, and barrel. He thus created a
new political entity which, at its greatest extent, measured 120 by 200
miles and which is known to history as the Duchy of Prussia. Elsewhere
it was mainly a question of stripping churches of their plate, as during the
‘‘smashing of the idols’’ movement that swept over the Netherlands in
1566; in Sweden King Gustavus Vasa decreed that every church in the
land should sacrifice a bell in favor of the exchequer. Most important of
all, the Reformation enabled rulers to lay their hands on the ecclesiastical
estates which, in some countries, amounted to 25–30 percent of all land.
The tenants who worked the land often cooperated, being glad to rid
themselves of monks and priests who were notorious for their strict
enforcement of rent and other prerogatives. Once they had been confiscated, estates were sold for ready cash or, though perhaps less frequently,
leased out to subcontractors. Either way, the result was to increase royal
revenues – in some cases several times over, as in England where Henry
VIII became the first monarch who was richer than all his magnates
combined – and also to create institutional support for the reforms which,
once they had reached into men’s pockets, became much more difficult to
undo.
Moreover, and though tens of thousands of monks and nuns were
simply turned out and left without a living, the rest of the clergy had to be
provided for. Traditionally priests had been members of a separate universal organization that looked after them by assigning them benefices.
Now, either they were turned into royal servants whose duty happened to
be looking after peoples’ souls, as in Lutheran countries; or else, though
retaining some autonomy in respect to internal organization and the
election of priests, they were excluded from interfering in matters of
government, as was the case in Calvinist countries. In the latter, rulers,
though they did not formally appoint themselves heads of the church,
made it their responsibility to keep an eye on its activities, including
education (both of laymen and of priests), rituals, and preaching. In the
former, they often went further and, consulting with their court theologians, themselves published new articles of faith. In England Henry VIII,
being neither a Lutheran nor a Calvinist but simply a bigamist with
absolutist tendencies, both eliminated the independence of the church
and issued a whole series of binding beliefs for his subjects to study and
profess. Any doubt concerning his intentions were removed in 1539 when the clergy were obliged to exchange their old translation of the Bible for a
new one that bore the royal seal. The title page showed an assembly of
figures, all of whom were busily saying vivat rex.	
Continuing to acknowledge the pope’s authority, Catholic rulers did
not go quite as far in these respects. Still, though the clergy’s immunities
and juridical powers remained much more extensive than under Protestant rule, many of them tightened control over religion; in the Empire,
their right to do so was sanctioned by the Peace of Augsburg (1555).

Turning necessity into virtue, they used the need to fight on behalf of the
‘‘true’’ religion as a convenient excuse for taking over ecclesiastical principalities, confiscating church property, and imposing taxes, as Charles V
did in 1520 when he turned the tercio reale and the Cruzada from voluntary contributions into permanent levies. Francis I on his part ordered all
ecclesiastical benefices worth over 100,000 livres to be sold and the
proceeds put into the royal coffers. His successors developed extortion
into a fine art. Church property was regularly confiscated and, equally
regularly, sold back to its original owners; as Michel de L’Hoˆpital, chancellor from 1560 to 1568, put it, ‘‘everything they [the clergy] possess
belongs to the king,’’ who could sell it whenever he wished ‘‘without even
informing them.’’ Toward the end of the century that paragon of piety,
Philip II of Spain, was reducing the Castilian church to penury by
siphoning away as much as half of its revenue. His income from it equaled
that which, as the master of the largest and richest overseas empire in
history until then, he derived from the New World.
With the duke of Bavaria in the lead, one after another Catholic rulers
set up councils – invariably with a majority of laymen among their
members – to supervise the affairs of the church, including the distribution of officers and of benefices. Nor was the faith itself left alone.
Charles V, though personally firm in the old belief, led the way; between
1520 and 1543 his theologians engaged on an unceasing quest for a
doctrine that, giving equal satisfaction to Catholics and Protestants alike,
could be declared binding on all of them. In France with its independent
traditions – already in the fourteenth century the Sorbonne had presumed to rule in matters of doctrine – the attempt of the Council of Trent to
redefine the Catholic religion was itself greeted with alarm. French literature on the respective rights of king and church grew and grew. In 1594
Pierre Pithou in Liberte´s de l’e´glise gallicane proclaimed that, within the
frontiers of the realm, the pope’s temporal power was nil and his spiritual
authority limited to whatever had received the king’s consent; when
Blanche of Savoy, the bride of Henry IV (1598–1610), asked him to
adopt the Tridentine articles as her wedding present she was told never to
concern herself with matters of state. Returning to Philip II, though he
did not lay down the principles of the faith, he did assert his power to the
point that no papal bull could be published in many of his dominions
without being approved by him first.
As secular rulers tightened their grip on the church, change also overtook the personnel of government. Encouraged by the spread of secular
humanism, beginning in the fifteenth century laymen were increasingly
able to get as good an education as ecclesiastics did. In time, this fact put
an end to the situation in which rulers were dependent on ‘‘clerks’’ to staff
their administration. For example, Thomas Wolsey – who was dismissed
in 1525 – was the last cardinal to fill the post of lord chancellor in
England. His successor Thomas More wore a hairshirt under his clothes;
nevertheless he was primarily a lawyer whose way to the top led though
Parliament, the Inns of Court, and a succession of business deals that
made him rich. Subsequent English monarchs were usually at some pains
to avoid appointing churchmen to state offices – something denied even
to William Laud who, as archbishop of Canterbury, played a major role in
the persecution of Puritans and other dissidents under Charles I. Here, as
in other Protestant countries, the lay nobility was giving up its independent lifestyle and turning to royal service as a means of advancing themselves. As of the second half of the sixteenth century they flocked to the
universities in unprecedented numbers in order to study, among other
things, the newly established ‘‘political’’ science whose founders were
Bodin and Justus Lipsius.
Though slower off the mark, Catholic rulers followed. In Spain Cardinal Granvelle, who served his master for over twenty years before dying
in harness in 1586, proved to be the last of his kind. Philip III’s chief
minister was the duke of Lerma. Philip IV appointed the count of Olivares
and, after him, Don Luis Mendez de Haro. Only France, which in the
days of Catherine de Medici (1559–89) and Henry IV (1589–1610) had
been moving in the same direction, proved an exception to the general rule. For thirty-seven years – 1624 to 1661 – it was run by two red-hatted
cardinals, Richelieu and Mazarin, who acted in the names of Louis XIII
and the young Louis XIV respectively. It should be noted, though, that
nobody could be more zealous in defending the ‘‘state’’ against the
church in Rome (and also in accumulating offices for himself) than
Richelieu himself – to the point that he has often been regarded as its true
founder. Here, too, in any case, the experiment was not repeated. One of
the first things Louis XIV did upon reaching his majority was to bring
government by ecclesiastics to an end. Acting as his own first minister, he
looked for his advisers among laymen such as Colbert and Louvois.
Meanwhile the very idea that orderly government depended on the
sanction of religion was coming under attack. Once again, it was humanism that opened the doors. Commenting on his much admired Roman
Republic, Machiavelli suggested that one of the secrets of political stability consisted of the upper classes using religion in order to keep the
masses in their place. The truth or untruth of these beliefs did not
matter; for him, it was not the mandate of heaven but virtu`, best defined
as a mixture of patriotism and courage, that both created government
and justified it. Nor was Machiavelli’s the only voice to raise itself: three
years after he had written The Prince, Thomas More published Utopia
(1516). There he described an imaginary polity which exercised religious toleration without falling into disorder or, indeed, suffering adverse
consequences of any kind. The only exception were atheists who would
deny men an eternal soul; but even they remained unmolested so long as
they did not publicly express their views. But for the fact that he was
famous for his love of satire, we might well accept More as the first true
modern. As it is, one is hard-pressed to say whether the proposal was
seriously meant. He himself was an intensely religious person who during his term as lord chancellor persecuted heretics as zealously as he
could. He ended by sacrificing himself in defending Catholicism against
Henry VIII.
In any case the idea was destined to take hold in countries such as
France and the Netherlands. As the former slid into civil war from 1561
on, religious tolerance was seen by Huguenot spokesmen as a way of
protecting themselves against the Catholic majority; additional support
came from the school of thought known as politiques (originally the
opposite of fanatiques) who hoped to use it for overcoming religious
divisions. Both Charles IX (1560–74) and Henry III (1574–89) toyed
with it from time to time, as did their mother who was the real power behind the throne. Though personally a pious Catholic, Henry III
ended up by appointing the Protestant Henry of Navarre as his successor,
alienating many of his subjects but clearly putting the imperatives of
government above those of religion. The king of Navarre himself was
probably a skeptic at heart; however, and as his famous quip about Paris
being worth a mass indicates, he was one who was prepared to follow
external forms provided they served his ends. He converted to Catholicism and assumed the throne as Henry IV. His next step was to put
an end to his predecessors’ attempts at persecution and grant religious
toleration in the form of the Edict of Nantes, which for ninety years
turned France into a virtual patchwork of Catholic and Protestant communities. Throughout his reign his factotum and chief adviser was a
Huguenot, the duc de Sully, a figure whom we shall meet again.
In the Netherlands religious differences were as acute as anywhere else
but, in the north at any rate, they tended to be submerged by the
desperate struggle for independence against Spain. William the Silent in
his capacity as the first leader of the revolt did everything in his power to
maintain unity, which explains why, during the late 1560s and early
1570s, he was found advocating formal equality between the Catholic
and Calvinist churches. However, their mutual suspicions – particularly
those of the extreme Calvinists, known as Predikanten – limited his
success. In 1573 the Catholic inhabitants of the northern provinces lost
their right to worship, though no attempt was made to deprive them of
their liberty of conscience. Here, as in most other countries, centuries
were to pass before all forms of religiously motivated discrimination were
abolished, offenses against religion struck off the statute book, and a
separation of church and state achieved – to say nothing of ending the
church’s dominant position in such fields as welfare and education.
Even as Catholic and Protestant rulers waged war in the name of their
respective creeds, they were forced by the demands of politics and of
commerce to deal with each other on an equal footing. The practice of
establishing permanent representatives had originated in Italy after the
Peace of Lodi (1454) where rulers dealt with each other on a daily basis
and where there were no cultural differences standing in the way. From
there it spread to countries such as Spain, France, and England whose
kings often relied on experienced Italian personnel. As the Reformation
divided Europe into warring camps, development toward a modern diplomatic service was interrupted; however, from about 1600 on political realities again prevailed and this evolution began to reestablish itself.
Whenever ambassadors arrived at some foreign court one of the first
questions that had to be settled was their right – and that of their staffs – to
worship in their own manner. In most cases the demand ended up by
being granted, first in private and then, increasingly, in public as well.
By this time both Catholic and, a fortiori, Protestant rulers were beginning to treat their churches as if they were mere departments of state. In
the former many of the ecclesiastics’ privileges and immunities remained
in place right up to the time of the French Revolution; but in the latter,
particularly Prussia, Sweden, and England (where Henry VIII had called
the clergy ‘‘only half our subjects’’),	 the differences between them and
laymen were rapidly being eliminated. While most educated people probably continued to believe both in the divine right of kings and in the
latter’s right and duty to look after their subjects’ spiritual welfare,
 here
too change was in the air. Perhaps the most radical position was found in
England where Thomas Hobbes published Leviathan in 1651. Influenced
by Galileo, Hobbes’ goal was to base his political system on the physics of
his day, eliminating all influence other than those that could be seen,
sensed, and measured. He was the first to proclaim that the belief in God
(if He existed) was irrelevant to politics; as to outer forms, he followed
Machiavelli in recommending that subjects be made to practice the
religion prescribed by the sovereign as best adapted to the maintenance of
public order. During the English Civil War, Hobbes was attacked as a
crypto-heretic and forced to flee abroad. However, it was symptomatic of
the changing outlook that, even though the Protectorate was committed
to Puritanism, under Cromwell he was permitted to return. From then
until his death – which took place well after the Restoration and thus after
another major change in religious policy – he was allowed to live in peace
as the king’s pensioner though, the plague of 1666 being blamed in part
on his blasphemous views, from then on he was forbidden to publish.
The papacy, too, changed its character. The rise of the great monarchies had not gone unnoticed south of the Alps. It made the popes realize
that their own future lay with a territorial principality in which they
themselves would exercise absolute government independently of anybody else. The work of building it was begun by the ‘‘terrible’’ (Jacob
Burkhardt) Sixtus IV (1471–84). By surrendering to Louis XI what he
could not protect – i.e., the right to tax ecclesiastical income and control
over benefices – he bought French assistance, or at any rate neutrality, in
his disputes with the remaining Italian rulers. The respite gained he used
to capture the strongholds of the Colonna family and kill their leader,
thus breaking their power and establishing papal rule over the city of
Rome once and for all. However, Sixtus’ attempts to continue his record
of intrigue and assassination in order to extend his control over Florence
as well was cut short by his death. His immediate successor, Innocent
VIII, was ineffective and made no further headway. Innocent’s successor,
Alexander VI (the Spaniard Rodrigo Borgia) became involved in the
series of Franco-Spanish wars that broke out when the French invaded
Italy in 1494 and which were to last until 1559. By deftly switching
alliances at several critical moments he provided himself with further
opportunities for aggrandizement. However, his aim was not so much to
strengthen the Papal State per se as to provide his relations – chief among
whom was his son Cesare – with principalities which he distributed right
and left.
Then it was the turn of Sixtus’ nephew, the warrior-pope Julius II
(1503–13). Concluding an alliance with Spain as the greatest power of
the time, he donned armor and, commanding in person, campaigned all
over central Italy. Cesare Borgia was captured, sold to Naples, and sent to
Spain where he died in a skirmish; the lands lost by Rome under Alexander VI were recovered and additional parts of the Romagna annexed.
When Julius was succeeded first by Leo X (1513–23), and then by
Clement VII (1523–35), both members of the Medici family, it looked as
if even Florence and indeed the whole of Tuscany were destined to come
under papal government. It was not to be, and the sack of Rome by the
troops of Charles V (1527) showed that the dangers to the Papal State
were by no means over. However, from this time until the Napoleonic
Wars Rome succeeded in maintaining itself as an independent political
entity with the pope as its undisputed ruler. Its frontiers lasted even
longer, remaining established for three and a half centuries to come and
were done away with only in 1859 when Italian unification was achieved.
Yet in a different way the construction of such a state proved to be a
double-edged weapon. Driven by the need to engage and maintain mercenary troops, the popes of the age engaged in venality to an extent not
known before or, probably, since. Accordingly they sold indulgences
(promising to get sinners out of purgatory) and quadrupled the number
of offices that were open to purchase; particularly in Germany which did
not have a single monarch to protect it, they also siphoned money away from the local ecclesiastical organization to Rome. All of this raised the
ire of believers – during his visit to Rome, which took place in 1510,
Luther witnessed papal corruption at first hand – and, when the time
came, helped him and his fellow reformers find their followers. Meanwhile the discussions by Guicciardini and Machiavelli show that contemporaries were becoming used to thinking of the church in terms of pure
power politics. The former accused the Papal State of having abandoned
even the semblance of Christianity in pursuing its secular ends. The latter
saw it as a state among states, remarkable for nothing but its outstanding
hypocrisy.
Given the circumstances of the time the use of intrigue, sword, and fire
to establish a viable Papal State was inevitable. The Universal Church, its
head saved from secular domination, was preserved. However, successive
popes found it difficult to reconcile their role as the vicar of Christ with
that of temporal ruler; as time went on, their influence over international affairs came to be in proportion to the size of the territory that
they ruled and the armed forces that they commanded. From the middle
of the seventeenth century this meant that, outside Italy, it amounted to
very little indeed: as Stalin was one day to ask, how many divisions did the
pope have? As for the church’s local organizations, regardless of whether
or not they were reformed, they tended to come under the authority of the
state. Stripped of their independent power, they found themselves surviving under the authority of the state with which they often forged a close
alliance. Even when ecclesiastics and their institutions still opposed the
state, as sometimes happened, inevitably they did so either within the
state or by fleeing to such other states as would offer them asylum; the
days when they possessed their own political communities were largely
over.